


				 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
			     MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
				MONITORING ORGANISATION
				   * * * * * * * *
	GRADE - II QUESTION PAPER
	TIME ALLOWED 0NE HOUR			     MAXIMUM MARKS 100

	NOTE: Question No 1 from each section is compulsory. Answer any
	two questions from each section in addition to compulsory
	question No 1

	SECTION A

	Q.1. Choose the correct answer, Any ten. ( compulsory )
	i) Plate current in a diode flows only when the plate is
	a) Negative with respect to cathode  b) positive with respect to
	cathode  c) when plate is at a lower voltage than cathode
	d) both at same potential

	ii) Zener Diodes are used for a) Rectification  b) Detection
	c) voltage regulation d) none of these

	iii) 3 resistors of 2,3 & 4 ohms are connected in series. The
	voltage across the circuit is 9 V , the current drawn by 3 ohms
	resistor is  a) 1.5 Amps b) 27 Amps c) 1 Amp d) 3 Amps

	iv) A superhetrodyne receiver is tuned to 555 KHz and its local
	oscillator at 1010 KHz . The image frequency will be a) 1565 KHz
	b) 455 KHz c) 1465 KHz d) none of these

	v) 3 to 30 MHz band is known as   a) MF b) LF c) VHF d) HF

	vi) The wavelength of a broadcast station at 1000 KHz is
	a) 30 Meters b) 300 Meters c) 0.3 Meteors d) none of these

	vii) The core of power supply transformer is laminated to
	a) decrease impedance b) increase impedance c) decrease eddy
	current losses d) none of these

	viii) In a resonant circuit
	a) Xl = Xc b) Xl > Xc c) Xl < Xc d) none of these

	ix) When frequency of a carrier is varied according to modulation
	the result is   a) frequency modulation  b) amplitude modulation
	c) product detection d) none of these

	x) The phase relationship between the input and output of a common
	emmitter circuit in degrees is   a) 90 b) 180 c) 270 d) 0

	xi) The quartz crystal oscillator is known for its
	a) linearity b) stability c) high output d) flexibility

	xii) The effect of interelectrode capacitance of a triode is more
	predominant at  a) HF b) VHF c) LF d) none of these

	Q.2 Draw the block diagram of a superhetrodyne receiver and
	explain briefly the function of each stage.

	Q.3 Draw the circuit of a full wave rectifier and explain
	briefly its working.

	Q.4 Write short notes on any three of the following
	a) demodulation b) AVC c) Microphones d) Harmonic generators

	Q.5 a) What are the colour codes for 100 Ohms, 470 KOhms
	and 4.7 MOhms  with 5% tolerance

	b) Is it possible to use a Ground plane antenna on HF
	communication. Justify your answer.

	SECTION B

	Q 1. Choose the correct answer, Any ten. ( compulsory )

	i) Swl's are permitted to transmit in the frequency band of
	a) 7-7.1 MHz b) 3.89-3.9 MHz c) 144-146 MHz d) none of these

	ii) The amateur license is renewed by a) P & T  b) Ministry of
	communication c) monitoring stations d) none of these

	iii) A3E emission is    a) DSB b) SSB  c) CW  d) FSK

	iv) Q code to indicate the location of a station is
	a) QTL b) QTH c) QTN d) None of these

	v) Amateur station on a ship can contact another amateur on
	land on a frequency authorized to a) the ship b) amateur
	stations c) by the ministry of communication d) ships calling
	frequency

	vi) SOS transmitted three times indicates
	a) urgency b) distress c) safety d) none of these

	vii) All timings in logbook should be in   a) IST b) GMT c) UTC

	viii) Amateurs are required to preserve their log for a period
	of ---- from the date of last entry a) 1 year b) 2 year
	c) 6 months d) permanently

	ix) The callsign VU2VX is authorized to a) Gr I amateur b) Gr II
	amateur c) Advanced amateur d) not authorized

	x) Amateurs are forbidden to transmit about
	a) Equipments b) weather c) Antennas d) Third party messages

	xi) Standard time and frequency is transmitted on
	a) 7050 KHz b) 14050 KHz c) 21050 KHz d) 15000 Khz

	xii) Test signals are not to be transmitted for more than
	a) 10 minutes b) 5 minutes c) 1 minute  d) none of these

	Q.2 What are the frequency bands, power and emissions
	permitted to Gr II amateurs

	Q.3a Give 'Q' codes for the following expressions. answer any
	four i) Your frequency varies ii) what is the name of the
	station ? iii) please change frequency to 14050 KHz iv) who
	is calling me ? v) please increase power

	3b Give the meaning of any four
	i) QRS ? ii) QRX 2000 iii) RST 599 iv) QRG 7051 KHz v) DE

	Q.4 Write short notes on any three a) Test signals b) secrecy
	of correspondence c) Amateur service d) Amateur Log Book

	Q.5a What do you understand by the term 'inspection ?
	5b What is the license fee for grade II and restricted amateurs ?
	What is the surcharge for late renewal ?
	5c Explain the procedure to obtain a duplicate license and who
	issues a duplicate license ?
